## Set and Subset

A *set* is a collection of objects of any specified kind. Sets are usually denoted by capitals. The objects belonging to a set are called its *elements* or *members*. We write $x\in A​$ if $x​$ is a member of $A​$, and $x \notin A​$ if it is not.

$A=\{ a,b,c,... \}​$ means that $A​$ consists of the elements $a, b, c, ...​$. In particular, $A = \{a,b\}​$ consists of $a​$ and $b​$; $A=\{p\}​$ consists of $p​$ alone. The *empty* or *void* set, $\emptyset​$, has *no* elements. Equality ($=​$) means a logical identity.

If all members of $A$ are also in $B$, we call $A$ a *subset* of $B$ (and $B$ a *superset* of $A$), and write $A \subseteq B$ or $B \supseteq A$. It is an axiom that *the sets $A$ and $B$ are equal $(A=B)$ if they have the same members*, i.e.,

$$
A\subseteq B \;\; and \;\; B \subseteq A.
$$

<details>
<summary><b>Note: Proof</b></summary>

---

If fall all elements in $A \subseteq B$ and $B\subseteq A$ is true. There must be some $x\in B-A$ and $x \in A-B$, which means $x\in B$ and $x\notin B$, as well as $x\in A$ and $x\notin A$. This is impossible for any elements which is in and not in a set.

$$
\begin{aligned}
& (A \subseteq B \land B \subseteq A)(A \ne B) \\
\iff & (\exists x)(x \in B -A \land x \in A - B) \\
\iff & (\exists x)(x \in B \land x \notin A \land x\in A \land x \notin B )\\
\implies & \text{false}
\end{aligned}
$$

**Notice in this proof**

**i.**

$A - B = \emptyset$ does not implies $A = B$. For if $A$ is a proper subset of $B$ (i.e., $A \subset B$), $B-A$ is not empty, but $A-B$ causes an empty set. Because for all $x \in A - B$ iff $x \in A$ and $x \notin B$, which is not possible for any $x$ while $x \in A$ always implies $x \in B$. Thus, the set $A-B = \emptyset\ne B-A$.

So, $A = B$ iff $A - B = B - A = \emptyset$.

**ii.**

If there is a set $A = \{x\;|\; (\forall x)(x \in X \land x \notin X) \}$, it is true, and $A = \emptyset$, because $\forall$ also means there can be nothing. But if there is a set $B = \{x\;|\; (\exists x)(x \in X \land x \notin X) \}$, it is false, because $\exists$ means there is at least one element there.

---

</details>

<br>

If, however, $A \subseteq B​$ but $B \nsubseteq A​$ (i.e., $B​$ has some elements *not* in $A​$), we call $A​$ a *proper* subset of $B​$ and write $A \subset B​$ or $B \supset A​$. "$\subseteq​$" is called the *inclusion relation*.

Set equality is not affected by the *order* in which elements appear. Thus $\{a,b\} = \{b,a\}$. Not so for *ordered pairs $(a,b)$*.^1 For such pairs,

$$
(a,b)=(x,y) \quad \text{ iff }^2 \quad a=x \text{ and } b=y,
$$

but not if $a=y​$ and $b=x​$. Similarly, for *ordered n-tuples*,

$$
(a_1,a_2,...,a_n) = (x_1,x_2,...,x_n) \quad \text{ iff } \quad a_k = x_k,\;\; k = 1, 2, ... , n.
$$

> ^1 See Problem 6 for a definition.
>
> ^2 Short of *if and only if*; also written $\iff$.

> [Note: Set equality...](mweblib://15530569190246)

We write $\{ x \; | \; P(x) \}$ for "the set of all $x$ satisfying the condition $P(x)$." Similarly, $\{ (x,y) \; | \; P(x,y) \}$ is the set of all *ordered pairs* for which $P(x,)$ holds; $\{ x\in A \; | \; P(x) \}$ is the set of those *$x$ in $A$* for which $P(x)​$ is true.

For any sets $A​$ and $B​$, we define their *union* $A \cup B​$, *intersection* $A \cap B​$, *difference* $A-B​$, and *Cartesian product* (or *cross product*) $A \times B​$, as follows:

$A \cup B$ is the set of all members of $A$ and $B$ taken together:

$$
\{
x \; | \; x \in A \text{ or } x\in B
\}.^3
$$

> ^3 The word "or" is used in the *inclusive* sense: "$P$ or $Q$" means "$P$ or $Q$ or *both*".

$A \cap B​$ is the set of all *common* elements of $A​$ and $B​$:

$$
\{
x \in A \; | \; x \in B
\}.
$$

$A-B​$ consists of those $x \in A​$ that are *not* in $B​$:

$$
\{
x\in A \;|\; x \notin B
\}.
$$

$A \times B​$ is the set of all *ordered pairs $(x,y)​$*, with $x \in A​$ and $x \in B​$:

$$
\{
(x,y) \;|\; x\in A, y\in B
\}.
$$

Similarly, $A_1 \times A_2 \times ... \times A_n​$ is the set of all *ordered n-tuples $(x_1, ... , x_n)​$* such that $x_k \in A_k​$, $k = 1,2,...,n​$. We write $A^n​$ for $A \times A \times ... \times A​$ ($n​$ factors).

> [Note: Similarly,...](mweblib://15530884357042)

$A​$ and $B​$ are said to be *disjoint* iff $A \cap B = \emptyset​$ (no common elements). Otherwise, we say that *$A​$ meets $B​$* ($A \cap B \ne \emptyset​$). Usually all sets involved are subsets of a "*master set*" $S​$, called the *space*. Then we write $-X​$ for $S-X​$, and call $-X​$ the *complement* of $X​$ (in $S​$). Various other notations are likewise in use.

**Examples.**

Let $A = \{1,2,3\}$, $B=\{ 2,4 \}$. Then

$$
A\cup B = \{ 1,2,3,4 \},\quad A\cap B = \{2\}, \quad A-B = \{1,3\}, \\
A \times B = \{
(1,2), (1,4), (2,2), (2,4), (3,2), (3,4)
\}.
$$

If $N$ is the set of all *naturals* (positive integers), we could also write

$$
A = \{ x\in N \;|\; x < 4\}.
$$

**Theorem 1.**

(a) $A\cup A = A$; $A \cap A=A$;

(b) $A\cup B = B \cup A$, $A \cap B = B \cap A$;

(c) $(A\cup B)\cup C = A \cup (B \cup C)$; $(A \cap B)\cap C = A\cap (B \cap C)$;

(d) $(A \cup B)\cap C = (A \cap C)\cup (B\cap C)$;

(e) $(A\cap B)\cup C = (A \cup C)\cap (B \cup C)$.

The proof of (d) is sketched in Problem 1. The rest is left to the reader.

Because of (c), we may omit brackets in $A\cup B\cup C$ and $A\cap B\cap C$; similarly for four or more sets. More generally, we may consider whole *families* of sets, i.e., collections of may (possibly infinitely many) sets. If $\cal{M}$ is such a family, we define its *union*, $\bigcup \cal M$, to be the set of all elements $x$, each belonging to *at least one* set of the family. The intersection of $\cal M$, denoted $\cap \cal M$, consists of those $x$ that belong to all sets of the family *simultaneously*. In stead, we also write

$$
\bigcup \{ X \;|\; X \in {\cal M}\} \text{ and } \bigcap \{ X \; | \; X \in {\cal M} \}, \text{ respectively}.
$$

Often we can *number* the sets of a given family:

$$
A_1, A_2, ..., A_n,....
$$

More generally, we may denote all sets of a family $\cal M$ by some letter (say, $X$) with indices $i$ attached to it (the indices may, but *need not*, be numbers). The family $\cal M$ then is denoted by $\{X_i\}$ or $\{ X_i \;|\; i \in I \}$, where $i$ is a variable index ranging over a suitable set $I$ of indices ("index notation"). In this case, the union and intersection of $\cal M$ are denoted by such symbols as

$$
\bigcup \{ X_i \;|\; i\in I \} = \bigcup_i X_i = \bigcup X_i = \bigcup_{i\in I}X_i; \\
\bigcap \{ X_i \;|\; i \in I \} = \bigcap_i X_i = \bigcap X_i = \bigcap_{i\in I}X_i.
$$

If the indices are *integers*, we may write

$$
{
\bigcup_{n=1}^{m} X_n , \bigcup_{n=1}^{\infty} X_n, \bigcap_{n=k}^{m}X_n,
} \;\; \text{etc.}
$$

**Theorem 2** (De Morgan's duality laws). *For any sets $S$ and $A_i (i\in I)$, the following are true*:

$$
\text{(i)}\;
S-\bigcup_i A_i = \bigcap_i (S-A_i)
;\quad
\text{(ii)}\;
S-\bigcap_i A_i = \bigcup_i (S-A_i)
$$

(If $S$ is the entire space, we may write $-A_i$ for $S-A_i$, $-\bigcup A_i$ for $S - \bigcup A_i$, etc.)

Before proving these laws, we introduce some useful notation.

**Logical Quantifiers.** From logic we borrow the following abbreviations.

"$(\forall x \in A)\;...$" means "For each member $x$ of $A$, it is true that ...."

"$(\exists x \in A)\;...$" means "There is at least one $x$ in $A$ such that ...."

"$(\exists ! x \in A)\;...$" means "There is a *unique $x$ in $A$ such that ....*"

The symbols "$(\forall x \in A)$" and "$(\exists x \in A)$" are called the *universal* and *existential quantifiers*, respectively. If confusion is ruled out, we simply write "$(\forall x),$" adn "$(\exists x),$" and "$(\exists ! x)$" instead. For example, if we agree that $m$, $n$ denote naturals, then

$$
``(\forall n)\;(\exists m)\quad m>n"
$$

means "For each natural $n$, there is a natural $m$ such that $m>n$." We give some more examples.

Let ${\cal M} = \{A_i \;|\; i \in I \}$ be an indexed set family. By definition, $x \in \bigcup A_i$ meeans that $x$ is in *at least one* of the sets $A_i, i \in I$. In other words, *there is at least one index $i\in I$ such that $x\in A_i$*; in symbols,

$$
(\exists i \in I) \quad x \in A.
$$

Thus we note that

$$
x\in \bigcup_{i\in I}A_i \quad \text{iff} \quad [(\exists i \in I)\; x\in A_i].
$$

Similarly,

$$
x\in \bigcap_i A_i \quad \text{iff} \quad [(\forall i \in I) \; x \in A_i ].
$$

Also note that $x \notin \bigcup A_i​$ iff $x​$ is in *none* of the $A_i​$, i.e.,

$$
(\forall i) \quad x \notin A_i.
$$

Similarly, $x \notin \bigcap A_i$ iff $x$ fails to be in *some* $A_i$, i.e.,

$$
(\exists i)\quad x \notin A_i . \quad \text{(Why?)}
$$

We now use these remarks to prove Theorem 2$\rm (i)​$. We have to show that $S-\bigcup A_i​$ has the same elements as $\bigcap(S-A_i)​$, i.e., that $x \in S - \bigcup A_i​$ iff $x \in \bigcap(S-A_i)​$. But, by our definitions, we have

$$
\begin{aligned}
x \in S - \bigcup A_i
& \iff [x\in S,\; x \notin \bigcup A_i] \\
& \iff (\forall i)\;[x \in S, \;x \notin A_i] \\
& \iff (\forall i)\; x \in S - A_i \\
& \iff x \in \bigcap(S - A_i),
\end{aligned}
$$

as required.

One proves part $\rm (ii)$ of Theorem 2 quite similarly. (Exercise!)

We shall now dwell on quantifiers more closely. Sometimes a formula $P(x)$ holds not for all $x\in A$, but only for those with an additional property $Q(x)$. This will be written as

$$
(\forall x \in A \; | \; Q(x)) \quad P(x),
$$

where the vertical stroke stands for "such that." For example, if $N$ is again the naturals, then the formula

$$
(\forall x \in N \;|\; x> 3) \quad x \ge 4 \tag 1
$$

means "for each $x \in N$" *such that* $x > 3$, it is true that $x \ge 4.$ In other words, for natural, $x > 3 \implies x \ge 4$ (the arrow stands for "implies"). Thus $(1)$ can also be written as

$$
(\forall x \in N) \quad x>3 \implies x \ge 4.
$$

Im mathematics, we often have to form the *negation* of a formula that starts with one or several quantifiers. It is noteworthy, then, that *each universal quantifier is replaced by an existential one (and vice versa)*, followed by the negative of the subsequent part of the formula. For example, in calculus, a real number $p$ is called the limit of a sequence $x_1, x_2, ..., x_n, ...$ iff the following is true:

For every real $\varepsilon > 0$, there is a natural $k$ (depending on $\varepsilon$) such that, for all natural $n>k$, we have $|x_n - p|<\varepsilon$.

If we agree that lower case latter (possibly with subscripts) denote real numbers, and that $n$, $k$ denote naturals $(n,k\in N)$, this sentence can be written as

$$
(\forall \varepsilon > 0)\; (\exists k)\;(\forall n > k)\quad |x_n - p|<\varepsilon. \tag 2
$$

Here the expressions "$(\forall \varepsilon > 0)$" and "$(\forall n > k)$" stand for "$(\forall \varepsilon \;|\; \varepsilon > 0)$" and "$(\forall n \;|\; n>k)$", respectively (such self-explanatory abbreviations will also be used in other similar cases).

Now, since $(2)$ states that "for all $\varepsilon > 0$" something (i.e., the rest of $(2)$) is true, the negation of $(2)$ starts with "*there is an $\varepsilon > 0$*" (for which the rest of the formula fails). Thus we start with "$(\exists \varepsilon > 0)$", and form the negation of what follows, and form the negation of what follows, i.e., of

$$
(\exists k)\;(\forall n > k) \quad |x_n - p|< \varepsilon.
$$

This negation, in turn, starts with "$(\forall k)$", etc. Step by step, we finally arrive at

$$
(\exists \varepsilon > 0)\;(\forall k)\;(\exists n > k)\quad |x_n - p| \ge \varepsilon.
$$

Note that here *the choice of $n>k$ may depend on k*. To stress it, we often write $n_k$ for $n$. Thus the negation of $(2)$ finally emerges as

$$
(\exists \varepsilon > 0)\;(\forall k)\;(\exists n_k > k)\quad |x_n - p| \ge \varepsilon. \tag 3
$$

The *order* in which the quantifiers follow each other is *essential*. For example, the formula

$$
(\forall n \in N)\;(\exists m \in N)\quad m>n
$$

("each $n \in N$ is exceeded by some $m \in N$") is true, but

$$
(\exists m \in N)\;(\forall n \in N)\quad m>n
$$

is false. However, two *consecutive* universal quantifiers (or two *consecutive* existential ones) may be interchanged. We briefly write

$$
`` (\forall x, y \in A) " \text{ for } ``(\forall x \in A) \; (\forall y \in A),"
$$

and

$$
``(\exists x, y \in A)" \text{ for } ``(\exists x \in A)\; (\exists y \in A),"\text{ etc.}
$$

We conclude with an important remark. The *universal* quantifier in a formula

$$
(\forall x \in A) \quad P(x)
$$

*does not* imply the existence of an $x$ for which $P(x)$ is true. It is only meant to imply that *there is no $x$ in $A$ for which $P(x)$ fails*.

The latter is true even if $A = \emptyset$; we then say that "(\forall x \in A)\; P(x)" is *vacuously true*. For example, the formula $\emptyset \subseteq B$, i.e.,

$$
(\forall x \in \emptyset)\quad x\in B,
$$

*is always true (vacuously)*.

### Problems in Set Theory

1. Prove Theorem 1 (show that $x$ is in the left-hand set iff it is in the right-hand set). For example, for (d),
$$
\begin{aligned}
x\in (A \cup B) \cap C
&\iff [x\in (A\cup B)\text{ and }x\in C]\\
&\iff [(x\in A \text{ or } x\in B), \text{ and }x\in C] \\
&\iff [(x\in A,x\in C) \text{ or } (x\in B, x\in C)].
\end{aligned}
$$

2. Prove that

    (i) $-(-A)=A$

    (ii) $A \subseteq B \text{ iff } -B \subseteq -A$

    > [Note: Problem 2.](mweblib://15528765946247)

3. Prove that

    $$
    A - B = A \cap (-B) = (-B) - (-A) = -[(-A) \cup B].
    $$

    Also, give three expressions for $A \cap B$ and $A\cup B$, in terms of complements.
    
    > [Note: Problem 3.](mweblib://15528772587156)

4. Prove the second duality law (Theorem 2(ii)).

    > [Note: Problem 4.](mweblib://15528789204604)

5. Describe goemetrically the following sets on the real line:
    $$
    \begin{aligned}
    \text{(i) }& \{x \;|\; x<0\}; &\text{(ii) }& \{x\;|\; |x|<1\}; \\
    \text{(iii) }& \{x \;|\; |x-a|<\varepsilon\}; &\text{(iv) }& \{x\;|\; a<x\le b\};\\
    \text{(v) }& \{x\;|\;|x|< 0\}.
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    > [Note: Problem 5.](mweblib://15528862520330)

6. Let $(a,b)$ denote the set
    $$
    \{\{a\},\{a,b\}\}
    $$
    (Kuratowski's definition of an ordered pair).

    (i) Which of the following statements are true?
    $$
    \begin{aligned}
    \text{(a) }& a\in (a,b); &\text{(b) }& \{a\}\in (a,b); \\
    \text{(c) }& (a,a) = \{a\}; &\text{(d) }& b \in (a,b); \\
    \text{(e) }& \{b\} \in (a,b); &\text{(f) }& \{a,b\} \in (a,b).
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    (ii) Prove that $(a,b)=(u,v)$ *iff* $a=u$ *and* $b=v$.

    ​	[Hint: Consider seperately the two cases $a=b$ and $a\ne b$, nothing that $\{a,a\}=\{a\}$. Also note that $\{a\} \ne a$.]
    ​	
    > [Note: Problem 6](mweblib://15528904850197)

7. Describe geometrical the following sets in the $xy$-plane.
    $$
    \begin{aligned}
    \text{(i)}\;\; & \{(x,y) \;|\; x<y\}; \\
    \text{(ii)}\;\; & \{(x,y)\;|\; x^2 + y^2 < 1\}; \\
    \text{(iii)}\;\; & \{(x,y)\;|\; \text{max}(|x|,|y|)<1\}; \\
    \text{(iv)}\;\; & \{(x,y) \;|\; y> x^2\}; \\
    \text{(v)}\;\;& \{(x,y)\;|\; |x|+|y|<4\}; \\
    \text{(vi)}\;\;& \{(x,y)\;|\;(x-2)^2 + (y+5)^2\le 9\}; \\
    \text{(vii)}\;\;& \{(x,y)\;|\; x = 0\}; \\
    \text{(viii)}\;\;& \{(x,y) \;|\; x^2 - 2xy + y^2 < 0 \}; \\
    \text{(ix)}\;\;& \{(x,y) \;|\; x^2 - 2xy + y^2 = 0\}.
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    > [Note: Problem 7](mweblib://15528923705933)

8. Prove that
    $$
    \begin{aligned}
    \text{(i)}\;\;& (A\cup B)\times C = (A\times C)\cup (B\times C); \\
    \text{(ii)}\;\;& (A\cap B)\times (C\cap D) = (A\times C)\cap (B\times D); \\
    \text{(iii)}\;\;& (X\times Y)-(X'\times Y') = [(X \cap X') \times (Y-Y')]\cup [(X - X')\times Y].
    \end{aligned}
    $$
    [Hint: In each case, whow that an *ordered pair $(x,y)$* is in the left-hand set iff it is in the right-hand set, treating $(x,y)$ as *one* elememt of the Cartesian product.]

    > [Note: Problem 8](mweblib://15529046031142)

9. Prove the *distributive laws*
    $$
    \begin{aligned}
    \text{(i)}\;\;& A \cap \bigcup X_i = \bigcup (A \cap X_i); \\
    \text{(ii)}\;\;& A\cup \bigcap X_i = \bigcap (A \cup X_i); \\
    \text{(iii)}\;\;& \left(\bigcap X_i\right)-A = \bigcap (X_i - A); \\
    \text{(iv)}\;\;& \left(\bigcup X_i\right)- A = \bigcup(x_i - A); \\
    \text{(v)}\;\;& \bigcap X_i \cup \bigcap Y_j = \bigcap_{i,j}(X_i \cup Y_j);^4 \\
    \text{(vi)}\;\;& \bigcup X_i \cap \bigcup Y_j = \bigcup_{i,j}(X_i \cap Y_j).
    \end{aligned}
    $$
    
    > [Note: Problem 9](mweblib://15529764639741)

10. Prove that
    $$
    \begin{aligned}
    \text{(i)}\;\;& \left(\bigcup A_i \right)\times B = \bigcup (A_i\times B); \\
    \text{(ii)}\;\;& \left( \bigcap A_i \right)\times B = \bigcap(A_i \times B); \\
    \text{(iii)}\;\;& \left( \bigcap_i A_i \right) \times \left(\bigcap_j B_j\right) = \bigcap_{i,j}(A_i \times B_j); \\
    \text{(iv)}\;\;& \left(\bigcup_i A_i\right)\times \left( \bigcup_j B_j \right) = \bigcup_{i,j} (A_i \times B_j).
    \end{aligned}
    $$
    
    > [Note: Problem 10](mweblib://15530440619799)
    
    
=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

